"I hope, my dear," said Mr. Bennet to his wife, as  they were at breakfast the next morning, "that you have  ordered a good dinner to-day, because I have reason to  expect an addition to our family party."
"Who do you mean, my dear? I know of nobody that  is coming, I am sure, unless Charlotte Lucas should happen  to call in -- and I hope my dinners are good enough for her.  I do not believe she often sees such at home."
"The person of whom I speak is a gentleman, and a  stranger."
Mrs. Bennet's eyes sparkled. "A gentleman  and a stranger! It is Mr. Bingley, I am sure. Why,  Jane -- you never dropt a word of this; you sly thing! Well,  I am sure I shall be extremely glad to see Mr. Bingley. --   But -- good lord! how unlucky! there is not a bit of fish  to be got to-day. Lydia, my love, ring the bell. I must  speak to Hill this moment."
"It is not Mr. Bingley," said  her husband; "it is a person whom I never saw in the whole course of my  life."
This roused a general astonishment; and he had the  pleasure of being eagerly questioned by his wife and five  daughters at once.   -- After amusing himself some time with their curiosity,  he thus explained --
"About a month ago I received this  letter; and about a fortnight ago I answered it, for I  thought it a case of some delicacy, and requiring early  attention. It is from my cousin, Mr. Collins, who, when  I am dead, may turn you all out of this house as soon as  he pleases."
"Oh! my dear," cried his wife, "I cannot bear to  hear that mentioned. Pray do not talk of that odious  man. I do think it is the hardest thing in the world, that  your estate should be entailed away from your own  children; and I am sure, if I had been you, I should have  tried long ago to do something or other about it."
Jane and Elizabeth attempted to explain to her the  nature of an entail. They had often attempted it before,  but it was a subject on which Mrs. Bennet was beyond  the reach of reason, and she continued to rail bitterly  against the cruelty of settling an estate away from a family  of five daughters, in favour of a man whom nobody cared  anything about.
"It certainly is a most iniquitous affair," said Mr. Bennet,  "and nothing can clear Mr. Collins from the guilt  of inheriting Longbourn. But if you will listen to his  letter, you may perhaps be a little softened by his manner  of expressing himself."
"No, that I am sure I shall not; and I think it was  very impertinent of him to write to you at all, and very  hypocritical. I hate such false friends. Why could not  he keep on quarrelling with you, as his father did before  him?"
"Why, indeed; he does seem to have had some filial  scruples on that head, as you will hear."
"At four o'clock, therefore, we may expect this peace-making  gentleman," said Mr. Bennet, as he folded up the  letter. "He seems to be a most conscientious and polite  young man, upon my word, and I doubt not will prove  a valuable acquaintance, especially if Lady Catherine  should be so indulgent as to let him come to us again."
"There is some sense in what he says about the girls,  however, and if he is disposed to make them any amends,  I shall not be the person to discourage him."
"Though it is difficult," said Jane, "to guess in what  way he can mean to make us the atonement he thinks  our due, the wish is certainly to his credit."
Elizabeth was chiefly struck with his extraordinary  deference for Lady Catherine, and his kind intention of  christening, marrying, and burying his parishioners whenever  it were required.
"He must be an oddity, I think," said she, "I cannot  make him out. There is something very pompous in his  style. -- And what can he mean by apologizing for being  next in the entail? -- We cannot suppose he would help  it if he could. -- Can he be a sensible man, sir?"
"No, my dear; I think not. I have great hopes of  finding him quite the reverse. There is a mixture of  servility and self-importance in his letter, which promises  well. I am impatient to see him."
"In point of composition," said Mary, "his letter does  not seem defective. The idea of the olive branch perhaps  is not wholly new, yet I think it is well expressed."
To Catherine and Lydia, neither the letter nor its  writer were in any degree interesting. It was next to  impossible that their cousin should come in a scarlet coat,  and it was now some weeks since they had received  pleasure from the society of a man in any other colour.  As for their mother, Mr. Collins's letter had done away  much of her ill-will, and she was preparing to see him  with a degree of composure which astonished her husband  and daughters.
Mr. Collins was punctual to his time, and was received  with great politeness by the whole family. Mr. Bennet  indeed said little; but the ladies were ready enough to  talk, and Mr. Collins seemed neither in need of encouragement,  nor inclined to be silent himself. He was a tall, heavy-looking  young man of five-and-twenty. His air was grave  and stately, and his manners were very formal. He had  not been long seated before he complimented Mrs. Bennet  on having so fine a family of daughters; said he had heard  much of their beauty, but that in this instance fame had  fallen short of the truth; and added, that he did not  doubt her seeing them all in due time well disposed of in  marriage. This gallantry was not much to the taste of  some of his hearers; but Mrs. Bennet, who quarrelled with  no compliments, answered most readily --
"You are very kind, sir, I am sure; and I wish with all  my heart it may prove so, for else they will be destitute  enough. Things are settled so oddly."
"You allude, perhaps, to the entail of this estate."
"Ah! sir, I do indeed. It is a grievous affair to my  poor girls, you must confess. Not that I mean to find  fault with you, for such things I  know are all chance in  this world. There is no knowing how estates will go when  once they come to be entailed."
"I am very sensible, madam, of the hardship to my  fair cousins, and could say much on the subject, but that  I am cautious of appearing forward and precipitate.  But I can assure the young ladies that I come prepared  to admire them. At present I will not say more, but  perhaps when we are better acquainted --  -- "
He was interrupted by a summons to dinner; and the  girls smiled on each other. They were not the only objects  of Mr. Collins's admiration. The hall, the dining-room,  and all its furniture were examined and praised; and his  commendation of everything would have touched Mrs. Bennet's  heart, but for the mortifying supposition of his  viewing it all as his own future property. The dinner too  in its turn was highly admired; and he begged to know  to which of his fair cousins the excellence of its cookery  was owing. But here he was set right by Mrs. Bennet,  who assured him with some asperity that they were very  well able to keep a good cook, and that her daughters had  nothing to do in the kitchen. He begged pardon for having  displeased her. In a softened tone she declared herself  not at all offended; but he continued to apologise for  about a quarter of an hour.